[Music]
hey everyone welcome to the smart
economy podcast today we're joined by
bonart mati the chief growth officer of
obligate how are you doing today bonart
hey hi Dylan doing good thanks how about
you I'm doing great we get to take this
journey together this is the first time
on the smart economy podcast we've done
almost 50 episodes and this is the first
video based format that we're going to
do so thank you for taking this journey
with us I'm very excited to talk about
the subject matter today which will be
onchain bonds for regulated Defi and I
can't wait to to jump into this but
before we kind of start the conversation
of who you are and what your background
is I just want to kind of ask you a high
Lev question to kind of get the
conversation rolling and that is is defi
something that is Unstoppable can defi
be killed great question uh to start
with so I strongly believe that it's not
stoppable due to several reasons uh
there we see that there is a great
progress in the industry on both the
sides like Defi and trfi trfi getting
ready for the M adoption but also you
know we see now tangible use cases in
the space and real impact also by
leveraging this technology in the real
world and and also enabling basically
folks all over the world to have a more
inclusive access to to finance and I I
strongly believe it's it's Unstoppable
it's just the beginning uh we are
currently seeing yeah I I love that
that's kind of what got me excited in
the blockchain and cryptocurrency space
back in 2017 um I'm a former Urban
planner I used to work for various
different governments looking forward
into how we can build better cities and
transportation networks and something
that really excited me about that
industry was leaving a long- lasting
Legacy and then with Bitcoin and
cryptocurrencies that's also what really
excited me was things like or banking
the unbanked and just providing access
to a global market for everyone in the
rest of the world to participate as long
as they had a cell phone and access to
the internet so I really appreciate that
response something that I think is
really cool about your background is you
come from a fintech space but you've
also spent a little bit of time in
Enterprise with places like Sony so some
examples of your fintech um and finance
had been doche bank and at GE and you
also started a company where you were
the CEO for quite some time so could you
just share with us what your
professional background is what does
your your story arc look like for the
different roles you've held up until
oblig G oh very interesting uh to be
honest and very like direct with you I
started as a programmer back in 19 I
don't know 99 uh programming websites
web applications like these web two
applications and then I joined actually
Sony to to help them with some
e-commerce systems and also yeah try and
and uh digitize so it was all about
digitalization and also then continued
with the GE with the G money arm in
Switzerland uh to build up the internet
Channel and grow it to to really decent
levels because at that time it was
really a tiny uh part of the of the
business that was originated bya
internet so we had great momentum I feel
like similarly we do now have with the
defi yeah we used to have that like the
web 2 momentum to jump on to and and you
know try to uh make some good progress
with this regard but also uh see some
tangible numbers you know we had to to
fight with with traditional folks who
used to promote their branches and their
Branch business and you know to say like
hey we need these people we need
tangible we need their relationship with
the customers face to face whereas then
suddenly the internet became more and
more viable and also you would see that
the customers wanted easier access to to
financing for example to credit cards
whatever uh to Car leasing and all these
things so I joined GE then and started
my career in the finance space as I said
building the internet Channel trying
also to help smmes with with lending
then moved over to to start my my first
fintech actually I joined a team that uh
that started fintech to to disrupt the
industry in the consumer landing and
andme Landing Space by providing this
instant credit decision online and and
being able to conclude a loan
application uh purely online that was
back in
2008 to
2011 so that helped me actually to to
try and also be kind of you know with
the first movers in the space and and
aim for disruption because the
traditional Finance space was just too
heavy too much of legacies too expensive
a lot of
inefficiencies and yeah that that kind
of was my first wave to join this this
space and moved over to also uh found
another fintech startup in the landing
space and then uh through actually I I
only joined dltd space like three years
ago when I uh helped u blockchain based
factoring company hi terminal to to
expand to Europe and get more of a
institutional grade of status you know
coming from an Ico and then trying to
establish itself in the real world and
dealing with real smmes and helping them
with working capital so yeah and here
here I am I feel like being back in the
programmer age where I used to start my
career especially because in our space
you know you just have to understand
everything how do smart contracts work
uh how do we interact with the real
world and and all all about this so
there is kind of a tech background
needed in order to understand everything
and uh the beauty of obligate yeah
basically I joined obligate beginning of
the year and we have a great Founders
team here uh like three of out of four
are lawyers as you can imagine in in
this space it's about you know the uh
regulatory framework it's about legal
engineering and of course you need to
have the tech people to combine these
two disciplines and come up with a
product that actually solves a real
problem yeah that's really cool that you
have a kind of programming background
and you also part of like the internet
Evolution or the the wave of of
introducing uh processes that the
internet could do to reduce times and
speeds when it comes to delivering loans
so I guess an interesting parallel that
I want to ask you about is how what do
you see with things like defi today and
how did they relate to your time at like
ge when you were utilizing and
leveraging the internet to reduce
processes for Distributing loans and
things of this nature are you feeling a
similar type of friction or is the world
kind of ready to adapt
um and they're able to say hey we've
seen this wave with fintech before now
we're seeing this new wave with defi are
you able to kind of see that the world
will be able to move a little bit
quicker or are you seeing a lot of the
same kind of pain points hey Dylan I
mean there are so many you know uh
similarities here which I can recognize
uh there is there are kind of the
similar like the same challenges but
just in a different on a different scale
whereas previously it used to be within
the organization trying to convince
people and jump on this train uh where
where it's not something that would uh
you know disrupt the whole company or or
eliminate jobs in the company but rather
something complementary that that can
help us as a company to to succeed and
also respond to the customer Demand
right so and it's the same with defi to
be honest because and yeah it's it's at
a larger scale now because we need need
regulation we need an environment that
helps us to interact with the
traditional Finance world and also I
mean you you said it in the beginning
right there are so many folks out there
who are unbanked still the access to to
finance to to the capital markets is is
very limited to only a certain group or
segments of of companies and people so I
think it's a different game at at a
different scale in a different League I
strongly believe due to the fact that we
have the community who is so fascinated
and so excited about this you know this
new way of uh collaborating interacting
with each other and the main point is
here really the intermediaries that you
don't need them so it's it's really Defi
and and there is no counterparty risk we
don't need to wait for somebody you know
to tell tell us like how should things
be done when we want to to to have a
transaction together like peer-to-peer
of course regulation is needed in order
to get some standards in place at least
to to help us you know that we are
speaking about the same when we have a
transaction that we know when we like a
securi and it's not something in between
so things like that will help of course
and there is still a lot of work to be
done I think we are now at a large scale
and it will in my opinion also as the
progress will be much faster in my
opinion than we used to be back in times
for the internet because nowadays you
just hear all these big names uh
speaking about tokenization and Defi and
Bitcoin and wrapping these type of
assets to make them also investable for
traditional investors so I think it's a
different game now and at a different
pace I might be jumping around a little
bit but you have an extensive background
in trafi and so you were mentioning
earlier in this conversation that this
is the you you finally took the leap
into obligate this year you were kind of
getting your feet wet uh 3 years ago is
it these big names these kind of
Institutions the black rocks stating
that they want to have an ETF large
Banks stating that they want to start
leveraging more than just custodial
solutions for Bitcoin and eth but they
want to look into staking and Defi and
all these other web 3 enabled processes
is it kind of these big names that are
coming board that gave you the
confidence to kind of go fulltime into
bringing obligate to the world for me it
was like the next logical step for me
personally but it is certainly also the
I mean certainly start everyone started
to to talk about it to speak about it to
uh to you suddenly were able to buy a
Tesla with with Bitcoin the adoption
started more and more I moved from from
Tech to to more the the commercial part
of the business and now I'm I feel like
being at exactly at in the Middle where
I can connect Tech with customer needs
and customer D wants to produce or
create uh Solutions based on on this
Tech so it is for sure the big names but
it is also the regulation around it so
for example in Switzerland two years
back the DLT act came into force that I
mean that's that it's really
groundbreaking because it gives us a
legal framework to work on and the basis
to create a lot of applications use
cases which have the respective legal
certainty also and and enforceability at
the end of the day and you know make
sure that investors are protected
issuers are protected so I I strongly
believe and and this is why I joined
this uh the company that this is going
to be the next big theme in the short to
midterm for sure yeah I'm I'm I'm happy
that you keep bringing up um regulations
because Switzerland has been very
forward thinking and and this is
actually something I'm really curious to
hear your perspective and insights about
within the country you have Zug which is
the the crypto Valley and then you have
various different cities that there are
companies that are locating what are the
differences between the the cities and
the regions in Switzerland are you
seeing that maybe Zug has more kind of
companies that are locating there and
maybe like Zurich has uh Builders and
kind of developers that are locating
there are there any nuances like that
within Switzerland Dylan come on I mean
Switzerland is not as as big as you
might imagine it's like you know you are
comparing now Fifth Avenue with I don't
know the Bronx it's it's very close to
each other yeah of course zuk is is now
has some special tax reliefs and stuff
that that incentivizes these type of
companies to to be based there but I
raised in in in syk so I still believe
syc is the center of the world so it's
it's about surc you
know but uh in general there is not not
a lot of you know you can it's it's like
it's it's very close to each other and
you you have the same folks working in
surc and and ZK which is mainly like
these two hops in zuk you have like the
most most companies from the space uh
but uh surc is also very well
established and you have also Geneva
where we also see a lot of companies
popping up and and being established
also from the space so it's it's
Switzerland and it's the regulation it's
tax reliefs but also yeah and and mainly
the first mover capabilities in terms of
when you see some Trends evolving or
maturing you rather try to to define the
rules of the game rather than you know
being left behind what currently happens
in the US is is really like a very good
example of of this you you just need to
make the rules instead of you know
starting to play and then say hey wait a
moment that was a foul who said that
this is not the way how we should play
rather than you know
retrospectively creating the rules or
say putting people to jail or whatever I
think Switzerland has made a great
progress to define the rule have clear
uh regulation legal standards in place
when it comes to tokenization when it
comes to security tokens when it comes
to everything that is related to to our
space basically and that is the reason
why we it's it's very clear when you're
building something you know it it works
and it's going to work and it's going to
be accepted it's it's compliant it's
legally enforceable yeah that that helps
a lot yeah I can't agree with you
anymore uh I currently am watching brain
drain happen here in the states I'm
seeing friends leave the industry going
to more traditional roles in software
development we're hearing a lot of
negative stories coming out of the us
about companies that are offshoring and
are choosing to locate elsewhere so this
is currently uh a moment of instability
and I sense a lot of fear I live in
Denver eth Denver is a major conference
that happens every year and that was one
of the major themes this year is VCS and
lawyers are afraid of what's happening
in the states and the the VCS and the
lawyers are seeing a lot of the
companies that they work with are
starting to Offshore so you really hit
home on a point that is a little bit
sore for me as someone who's been
working in the space since 2017 but you
know in in emerging in Innovative
Industries these are the waters that we
have to tread so something I'm curious
about is how MAA eu's regulations that
recently got approved improved might
have impacted or uh maybe even helped
solidify the regulations that are in
Switzerland are you noticing any sort of
positive externalities as those
regulations have gone through yeah I
mean I will try to answer this question
however I'm not one of these lawyers I
mentioned before so however uh yeah I
mean Mika is is a great framework there
is quite of an overlap with the DLT act
in Switzerland and it's essentially what
it means for us this even though we are
not part of of this uh you know
ecosystem the EU but but still we most
likely will will have to comply with it
and also apply certain certain elements
of it but in general I would say it's
like 95 to
99% uh in line with what we have here in
Switzerland we certain things would
would be qualif ified as U investment
brokerage type of activities which would
also require certain additional
licensing but here I think obligate is
very well positioned by by the fact that
we we have so many partners on board and
also renowned names on our cap table uh
you know such as um the Swiss stock
exchange um arm uh like investment arm
uh we have Early Bird like who is the
biggest VC in the space and also yeah we
are also a circle uh portfolio company
so we we try to utilize leverage this
these Partnerships we have also a
license from a Baffin regulated
investment broker who which allows us
also to to be kind of to automatically
comply with this type of laws or new
laws and be kind of a bit a step ahead
when it comes to uh regulation and if it
would mean that we would need an
additional Li license we would already
be there even though today we act as a
as a Marketplace as a platform as a
technology provider if you want so where
to connect the parties together but we
still uh claim uh that that we are a
regulated platform because we are we are
regulated in Switzerland as a financial
intermediary we have this uh we're
acting under this investment brokerage
umbrella from the partner we have in in
Germany who is buffin regulated so we
are following this movement very closely
and will adapt if necessary but still
aim to remain flexible in terms of you
know and agile in terms of how we can
serve the customers without having to
now obtain a banking license for example
we don't want to go that route because
we still aim for
defi uh intermediation no counterparty
risk so have you know of course the law
reflected where it's needed but try to
offer the best service possible to our
customers yeah that's really awesome I
see a lot of similarities with uh like
gdpr and and and the right to be
forgotten and kind of how this is just
superimposed now on websites that we
visit where we get to choose what kind
of cookies we want to have enabled or
not um so it's really interesting to
kind of hear that even though there's
like 95% alignment there's still that 5%
that you might need to worry about and
the line that obligate wants to take
which would be focusing more on the defi
side of things rather than going after
like a money transmitter license or a
banking license or something like that
yeah no I just want to hear what your
initial insights were with with uh it
sounds like Bitcoin the Bitcoin white
paper was the first time you kind of
became aware of cryptocurrencies and
digital assets and from my perspective
you were working in the trafi space so
you know as someone as people in the
cryptocurrency space are inherently
skeptical of everything you know um
don't trust verify is a big phrase that
a lot of people use I think that is an
interesting dichotomy because when I
first stumbled on the Bitcoin white
paper and just learned about Bitcoin I
viewed it with a lot of skepticism but
for me my aha moment was when I realized
that Bitcoin operates as a peer-to-peer
Ledger that kind of clicked for me
because my first experiences with
peer-to-peer technology were things like
Napster and lime wire and these things
that are pirating essentially but um you
know as a 15-year-old who was
downloading Emin albums that my parents
didn't want me to listen to that was
very empowering and so when I was able
to understand that Bitcoin is a similar
technology but for a ledger that can
represent transactions and a money
that's when it clicked for me and it
took maybe four years after the first
time I I first read the white paper and
first looked into Bitcoin it took about
four years for that to click for me so
I'm just curious as to what when you got
introduced which it sounds like was the
Bitcoin white paper back in the day what
were the things that made you skeptical
and then what was your aha moment what
finally made you come around to this
technology that's very interesting so
yeah basically as with every new uh
technology or Trend I I used to remember
a phrase I don't know by whom it was
made but but I don't know whether it was
Henry Ford or or someone else uh who
said that you know first they laugh at
you then they they ignore you and and
then U I know but at the end win and
then you win so the reaction was always
the same also when I started the fintech
uh back in 2010 it felt like the same
you know people didn't take seriously
they said oh you guys your fex I mean
that's funny enough it's like a website
with some code behind it and then you
call it fintech you know that's that was
like the moment where people wouldn't
take you serious but at some point it
became material in the sense of you know
tremendous volumes being traded over the
internet and internet being the main
channel for acquiring uh new volumes for
the business personally
uh to be honest even though I was also
in the space I I was also a bit
skeptical in the beginning even though
the technology due to my background I
mean that that was very fascinating and
I I really enjoyed
also um following this trend a bit and
reading about it and also interacting a
bit with the community but unfortunately
I I didn't buy Bitcoin from the
beginning so but technology wise it was
always interesting to hear about it and
the reason why people uh didn't take it
so seriously in the beginning in my
opinion was due to the fact that it was
like strange to see which which uh folks
are are dealing with it so it's it was
mainly I don't want to call them freaks
because at some point I was also a freak
or I'm still a freak whatever even
though I'm I'm having a yeah I think it
was not taken seriously uh due to the
fact that people who had interacted with
it were not always trustworthy there
were some topics around unethical
methods you know you used to hear that
it was a currency for the dark net and
things like that I think that was like
the big issue in the beginning but
suddenly at some point um it it started
to to become
material and I think that was the time
where it is the effect and the power of
the crowd in my opinion where where
people just you know realized hey this
is something that can connect us uh with
each other and also can help for the
financial inclusion globally the crypto
Anarchist highly right leaning
libertarian message of bitcoin's early
days is something that turned off a lot
of people and kind of excluded a lot of
I don't want to make it negative but
rational thinkers or maybe more Centrist
individuals so it that also was what
made it difficult for me to kind of
grasp and and glob on to to this space
but by 2017 you know the message that I
bought into which was the hype back then
which was tokenize the world run iOS
let's decentralize Uber let's
decentralize Airbnb it really uh was
kind of an empowering message that I
think was able to reach the masses so I
feel like our story arcs are similar in
that way in which we we first looked at
this we saw the people that were into it
I to only assumed Bitcoin was used for
things like Silk Road and for darket
activities but by 2017 that message
started to grow Beyond uh Silk Road Silk
Road 2.0 and and all these nasty things
that were kind of associated with the
asset class back then I know that
obligate focuses on companies and
corporations for onchain bonds but I am
curious to hear your Insight um into the
volcano bonds that El Salvador is using
to help grow the the technological City
that's that's going on there just from
your perspective how is a country that's
adopting Bitcoin to use um to back its
bonds how is that changing the
perspective of companies are companies
beginning to look more into leveraging
digital assets as collateral because
there is a country that is taking the
leap or is there not really any relation
and uh companies maybe have different
incentives to use cryptocurrencies or
digital assets as collateral yeah I mean
it always come comes back back to the to
the question um what problems are you do
do you want to solve or do you have to
solve and at the end of the day it's
it's about access to Capital uh what we
see in our ecosystem and from the issuer
side that is that many issuers they lack
access to to finance due to several
reasons there is uh you know there is
the financing Gap there are there are
errors in the in the Capital Market lack
of information that flows to a kind of a
perception of risk to to lenders
asymmetries in this type of of things
but also the high uh requirements on on
collateral it's only economically viable
for certain uh size of companies to to
get uh access to Capital so what we see
is that you know it's not about having
like wanting to to deal with digital
assets but maybe if that's a way on how
to become more inclusive and to get
access to Capital get used to it so far
it's um we see that there is a
transition going on there is not like
you know all the companies are already
exposed to digital assets and and
already familiar with wallet
infrastructures um there is still a lot
of educational work required from our
side when it comes to the issuers uh of
course not like the web 3 companies uh
they are Absol absolutely fine with it
but like if we speak about smmes all
over the place and and especially in
also in developing countries there is
always a certain class Affinity to to to
this technology yeah so they they see it
as a way to to get more access to
Capital and especially when when it's
now when it's a
regulated uh framework uh around they
around which they can they can have
these transaction you know have the kyc
kyp everything settled via a platform
for example that is regulated they would
feel comfortable know when they are
accompanied from the on boarding until
the settlement uh the on and off ramping
uh when you can support them with this
along these processes yeah they see the
advantages that they are also accepting
the fact that you know it's yeah first
you need to realize it's not crypto it's
it's the technology yeah it's not the
cryptocurrency but it's it's the
technology and and we suddenly have a a
security tokenized natively on chain
that is now called a you know a token
you have a token in your hands it's it's
a bond token you're holding that in your
wallet and suddenly it it it can make
make a huge impact to your daily
business uh can help you with the
working capital and and um I think it's
a it's a way to achieve your goals and
that is going to be the trigger in my
opinion also for the mass adoption so
for me also tokenization was like the
key uh in 2017 18 and not only the Ico
part but but now also the security token
part that is that was key when when when
we start tokenizing real world assets
you use all the advantages that come
along with it right so
fractionalizing uh bundling assets using
collateral from The Real World tokenize
it and then suddenly you can have like I
don't know intellectual uh property in
form of a token you can put it as
collateral raise capital and I think I
think that's very important but as I
said the there is still a lack of
knowledge with this regard so if we as
an industry a as a space Can U
contribute to uh make this this uh
technology user friendly uh have a clear
easy U act that that will allow this
this folks to to interact with the
technology I think that is the point of
time where where we will see the M
option it certainly has started so
that's um really interesting Insight
that the companies you're collaborating
with aren't necessarily leveraging
obligate because they're defi natives
just looking to use crypto in any way
that this is actually a way that is
reducing frictions and providing more
opportunities than traditional mediums
offer them absolutely yeah I mean it is
when you compare what it requires to
issue a bond we we have done a research
we have analyzed this so we have count
all the intermediaries that are required
for a bond inssurance for example and we
count as 13 of them so you have the
financial Market infrastructure you have
all these uh intermediaries the paying
agents agents settlement agents you have
the banks who will uh transfer the F
funds and you have the low firms and all
of them so uh that's just that's sounds
already like a lot of cost associated
with it and frictions and and
inefficiencies so by leveraging the
technology of course basically you can
eliminate all these
intermediaries with with what we have
done for example leveraging you know
Public public blockchains using smart
contracts uh DVP Atomic swap of stable
coins and and eot that
suddenly you know eliminates all all the
intermediaries you can still have the I
mean you have the same even better legal
certainty uh you don't have a count
counterparty risk you can achieve your
goals you just need to understand what
it is about and especially when you are
in a regulated framework as an investor
you know you are protected as an issue
you know I'm dealing with serious people
here and and who can open up uh new
sources of funding for me including
those of you know tradition
investors because also that's the that's
the point right that you also just
mentioned it's not only about the D5
Hulks and and we we for sure that that
was one of our aims and it is our vision
to bring more
regulated assets into our space to make
real world assets investable to our to
the defi
investors uh but with you know a better
link to to yields to the real economy
and as a as a new asset class compared
to the highly volatile you know
cryptocurrencies we we see which are
purely based on speculation and and not
always like real fundamentals but rather
uh speculation so this is for sure
something that that uh allows defa
investors to have advantages by having
access to these type of assets but also
traditional investors like trfi
investors they didn't have this type of
assets on the horizon because this type
of issuances as I mentioned I mean if
you eliminate all these intermediaries
you can reduce the cost we estimated up
to like like uh 82% by you can reduce
the cost by 82% and have transactions
settled five times faster for example
and and by doing so you open up a new
asset class because suddenly smmes all
over the world but also larger
corporates can consider to issue a bond
which was just economically not viable
before and and now suddenly it is so we
strongly believe that this is a huge
case I mean we are not the only ones in
the space uh we are happy also we are
also collaborating with other parties
because we we believe that together uh
we can make you know bigger impact and
we only succeed if we try to bring Trust
on the table from our space and uh we
strongly believe that we will play a big
role uh with this regard but there are
also other parties who are doing great
progress and um yeah it's good to see
that the the industry is evolving yeah I
think that has kind of been a big trend
for the end of 2022 most of 2023 is is
um bringing rwa real world assets on
chain and that's one of the benefits
that blockchain offers it's it's it's an
open- Source mutable public Ledger that
everybody can access and you've you've
hit you've hit this point a bunch in
this conversation when you have
well-defined regulations leveraging this
technology then you just provide more
open transparent sort of information for
everyone who can participate something
that
as an investor like myself I'm just a
retail investor um I own Bitcoin and
other crypto assets I also own stocks
and index funds um so I understand kind
of where uh with the speculative nature
of cryptocurrencies you know price goes
up price goes down because the free
market and people just speculate when it
comes to like stocks there's price to
earning ratio there's um I can get like
quarterly earnings from these companies
I understand where I can see gains and
yields from these assets uh when it
comes to bonds where where does the
yield come from how am I earning any
sort of interest on
this yeah very interesting so yeah I
mean also this is something that um is
suddenly possible Right the access to
this type of assets to to uh to bonds uh
which typically in the try f are rather
accessible to institutional investors
and uh by tokenizing this this
instruments and and securities we
suddenly have
access I mean also private investors
have access to this type of assets and
you um you have there is like these are
typical fix income instruments where you
have a fix rate defined you know exactly
what you're going to get at the end of
the day
uh obviously there is a risk free
component in the rate uh that is usually
tied to I mean yeah government bonds
treasury bills kind of yield rates and
and on top of that you have like the um
credit uh risk or um credit margin
credit risk margin that that reflects
the credit worthiness of the rating of
of the underlying Assets in this case
you have companies who issue the bonds
and based on their rating and the credit
assessment you have uh the the spread
the credit spread reflected on on the on
the margins you get on the yields you
get so this is how you uh and you can
diversify you can choose to to invest in
secured uh transactions or to in
unsecured transactions
but basically the credit credit margin
will be reflected which is a combination
of credit worthiness uh underlying
collateral and and all these elements
that would make up then your uh yield
the end of and uh sorry for cutting you
off but that was something that as I was
digging around the platform I was just
curious to learn a little bit more
what's the difference between uh a
secured and an unsecured uh is it
transaction is that the term that you
used yeah or issue you can issuance or
whatever so you you can u a secured
transaction or a secured issuance is is
a is a bond a secured bond that um where
an issuer has put a
collateral um on the table so it's
backed by by collateral typically some
real world assets invoice receivables
loan receivables other type of of assets
you can put as collateral uh but also
digital assets I mean that's we are very
familiar in the space that you would uh
pledge or or put digital assets as
collateral so in this case we call them
secured bonds and the non-secured bond
there you would uh purely rely on the
rating of the company and and reputation
of the company and there is no
collateral assigned to the transaction
so that's that's the difference and and
there you can really uh play with your
portfolio you can have parts of your
portfolio you know compound of secured
transactions and part of it unsecured
depending on your uh risk appetite
There's an opportunity for diversity
when it comes to or diversification
rather when it comes to the types of
bonds that somebody can uh hold through
obligate so thank you for clearing that
up because me being an outsider in this
industry I I just like didn't understand
understand what that was something I'm
also curious about and and I'm super
happy you're coming from a developer
background and a programmer background
so you can probably highlight some
nuances as to why uh obligate opted to
build on top of polygon why did the team
choose to build on top of an L2 as
opposed to some sort of alternative L1
or even ethereum as the Bas layer yeah
that's a very good question so we uh the
team actually we used to be on a private
blockchain initially dealing with
uh also some larger banks in the space
so we have even had you know credit s
and some other corporates uh investing
via our platform and that was done on a
private blockchain the reason why we
moved to a public blockchain and then
specifically on to polygon uh was mainly
due to the efficiencies I mean in speed
and and also cost efficiencies uh but
also it has established in the space but
also in Switzerland is one of the public
blockchains where big uh institutions
and also the the crypto Banks we have in
Switzerland chose chose basically
polygon to to work on and on top of that
we get great support from the team and
the
community uh which is really great and
um also you know try to leverage our
Network their Network use synergies
among uh the the players who are
connected with polygon blockchain and
the ecosystem so it sounds like
Switzerland in general polygon is kind
of like an accepted chain or I guess
like Society speaking it's been approved
by a bunch of different actors in the
space you know I I earn my bread and
butter by covering the Neo blockchain
which is an alternative L1 I've been
covering this project since 2017 so I'm
always curious to hear what the appetite
is for other types of block chain
networks so are you seeing that in
Switzerland there are also other
builders that are exploring other
networks or are you really seeing kind
of like an AG glomeration uh a lot of
companies that are just choosing to
build on polygon so this conversation
around exploring other blockchain
networks is not even happening I I think
we we are uh hitting uh topic that is
really crucial I think it's also very
important that that
we we get uh this
interoperability fixed at some point you
know that we don't have to deal with
this multiple uh blockchains uh that
that in my opinion is crucial that this
cross chain uh communication is is fixed
and and at some point so we we
definitely see Focus or uh uh intentions
to standardize things especially in
Switzerland there is an association that
for example also uh is putting standards
on Smart contracts how they are built
how they should be built in order for
you know I mean standards are really
crucial for for the industry to to get
to mass adoption and uh the same with
with uh selection of blockchains in my
opinion so there is certain players who
are really uh systematically relevant I
would say for the industry such as you
know we have uh Signum in Switzerland we
have Saba and and other players uh the
crypto Banks um and yeah there is the
ethereum foundation as such but many
other uh Builders yeah we have seen that
that a couple of them who are relevant
in the industry would try to focus on on
established uh layers and and that's
what where we uh have put our bets on so
it's polygon we strongly believe I mean
we see really some big names uh uh
building on polygon and uh but but we
will I mean we are open and also have on
the road map uh
certain uh developments going on to
expand to other chains but ideally we
would need to to solve this problem
maybe differently without having to
integrate every and single uh blockchain
yeah individually no I really appreciate
that insight and this is Maybe
uh a philosophical question are we at a
place in the growth of the blockchain
and crypto industry where we're seeing
uh a player or seeing an entity that is
building a a proper solution for
interoperability and cross-chain
communication um if you just look back
since defi summer in 2020 at all the
bridge hacks and defi hacks there's just
so many so many billions of dollars
maybe even trillions at this point have
been lost or stolen and this is an
Achilles heel for connecting different
blockchain ecosystems and infrastructure
so are we are we there yet are are there
people that are building these
cross-chain communication Solutions or
are we still at the experiment phase are
are do you have a good sense for for um
these types of teams that that might be
getting the answer might be getting
close closer to the solution I I'm not
so familiar with it to be honest I see
that there are traditional players who
are aiming to put some standards uh in
here there are these um you know zero
knowledge proof uh tensions uh to bring
certain certainty in place but yeah I
think I'm not sure whether it's it's
going to be fixed by these uh Bridges
and and single fixes as you can see
as you correctly mentioned I mean that
we saw all these hacks and and uh that's
that doesn't really bring Trust on the
table so unless we haven't solved this
and that's not really an answer to your
question but but this is the reason why
we still have Builders
who H you know migrate uh protocols from
one chain to another and just have these
redundancies in place instead of U
having a clear Lane where you would have
this inter
operability uh so I might need to check
also internally what what uh what this
will mean but but yeah I I'm not really
aware of of teams who are building in
the space with this regard yeah no
that's a good question um and a great
response uh I myself am not so certain
that there is a one a single solution
right now or a single team that that is
building this there are certain teams
that are building for certain aspects
when you look at like thorchain they're
building for layer one to layer one
essentially Atomic swaps though that's
not correct the correct terminology or
the correct processes but that's just a
single asset that's that's cross chain
asset swapping it's not necessarily
cross-chain communication so as an
industry we still have a long way to go
kind of wrapping up I want to bring this
question back to the Forefront of the
smart economy podcast as as we have
great guests such as yourself join who
have a variety of different backgrounds
and and insights and perspectives this
is kind of philosophical but in 10 years
where do you see the blockchain and
cryptocurrency Industry yeah it's it's
it's a great question so ideally in 10
years uh we have solved the
interoperability question we have come
up we have the the larger Banks the
commercial Banks uh participating in the
ecosystem um may this be by them you
know introducing their stable coins or
whatever it means uh to to help us to
get the mass adoption then there is I
mean a couple of other things regulation
I mentioned that a couple of times
obviously but but that's that's I think
there we need to have Global guidelines
and and rules how to play because you
know all these jurisdictions this
individual laws and and regulation
regulatory Frameworks that's good good
enough but unless we don't have like a
global playbook for the space that's
still going to be very difficult to
differentiate between markets and
jurisdictions and it will create
barriers instead of uh opening up the
lanes for a Global Communication as we
intend to have like an more inclusive
Financial world and the globally
connected world so ideally we should
agree on what is now valid what is the
security what is not and so on maybe
Dows will will play a role a big
role in the future uh I mean you see
these
securitizations uh from the trfi where
where things get pulled and and made
investable to Trad try investors or like
private debt funds and other uh lenders
I think they will play a crucial role
due to the fact that you can uh dedicate
certain purposes and missions when it
comes to raising capital and we have
clear rules you can uh segregate funds
and you know have have clearly defined
rules on how things get uh
distributed or collected and yeah
standards I think standards will be
helpful and we will have them in 10
years in 10 years we will uh be able to
hopefully you know lower uh reduce all
the frictions that we have today all
these discussions about you know
interoperability different type of smart
contract uh like tokens and smart
contracts uh methodologies on how we
build things that will need to be this
complexity will need to be reduced and
and if we work together I think we'll
get there uh and and I've never seen
this uh collaboration more than in our
space to be honest I mean sometimes we
we we speak to competitors and we we
exchange ideas and there is not this
this you know
competitive uh attitude as it it used to
be earlier in in the trfi world maybe
still today yeah I'm very confident that
we'll get there and uh that that will
help us to to to get to mass adoption uh
so we we hope to be playing a big role
uh in the space as as obligate uh but
for me personally also this is a very
exciting Journey I'm very happy that I I
joined uh the space uh first of all in
general and it's really very interesting
and it helps us to to solve real
problems but also make sure that that
everyone in the world and globally like
has access to to Capital bonard I love
it um the the future of
interoperability uh amongst uh
institutions uh long-standing
institutions maybe even banks that offer
things like stable coins is is
definitely a bright future and I think
that between now and then it does take
the companies like obligate who do
provide access to traditional ways of
fundraising for companies and for
raising debt uh in order to build um I
think it takes the obligates of the
world to slowly get there and as we see
more and more regulations uh become
clearly defined across the world and
hopefully more of a global international
standard uh then maybe one day we will
be there where we're going to see all
sorts of real world assets on chain uh
but between now and then who are the
companies you want to talk to who are
the projects you want to collaborate
with and what's the best way for them to
get in contact with you wow okay that's
a good question so yeah um it's
the asset managers digital asset
managers um you know crypto whales but
but and not only be you know to to get
them uh and invest in in the ecosystem
in the marketplace in this type of
assets but also to contribute to the
growth of the space as such and also to
to contribute to the real world by by
giving providing liquidity and capital
to the real world and to the smmes of
the world and uh uh globally so that
that's that's what I would wish and also
the traditional Finance uh world uh to
be more active and proactive uh try out
things you know run pcc's in the space
and um it's nothing to to fear it's I
mean the there is a perceived risk but
but if you deal with the topic if you if
you make sure you understand what it is
about how it is working and you have the
uh legal certainty you know then then
it's just about uh being ready to to try
things out and and um do some first
mover uh approaches and uh if somebody
is one of these crypto whales or a trafi
who's willing to experiment and uh try
bringing real world assets on chain uh
what's the best way that they can
contact you or reach out to obligate
yeah I mean they can go to obligate
tocom or they can uh get us get contact
us on our telegram Channel they can
reach out to hello obligate tocom we
have we are everywhere uh on Twitter or
X now and yeah it's it's about um you
know having a real impact in the world
by at the same time generating yield
that is really tied to the real economy
and
um yeah happy to to speak to these folks
and and we are always uh here to to
support to answer questions and get in
touch Bernard thank you so much for
coming to join the smart economy podcast
um the intersection of real world assets
and uh bringing them onchain has been
something that is increasingly becoming
more interesting to me personally over
the past year or so so was a pleasure to
be able to dig into this with you today
hey thanks a lot Dylan it was great
speaking to you yeah thank you very much
for joining cheers thanks
Dylan
w